Welcome back everyone.
This lecture on Spacey basics.
There are a few key steps forward going to space.
We're going to cover in this lecture.
The first step is loading the language library.
Remember you need to have install the language library as shown in the spacey setup lecture.
Then once you've loaded in that language library we build the pipeline object and from that pipeline
object we can use tokens perform parts speech tagging and understand different token attributes.
So as I mentioned Spacey works if a pipeline object and the main idea here is that there is an end of
the function that we're going to create from space.
That is going to automatically take in raw text and perform a series of operations that is going to
tag parse and describe the text data and those operations are known as tokenization parsing piece of
speech recognition and so on.
And we're going to cover each of those and a lot more detail later on.
So our purpose for this lecture is is to discover the pipeline object and various series of operations
in subsequent lectures.
We're going to dive a lot deeper into each of these individual aspects of an LP and spacey.
So we're going to talk about tokenization parts of speech or POS stemming limitation and a lot more
detail.
So keep in mind we're going to introduce those terms right now in this lecture but we're going to Diven
to a lot more greater detail later on.
OK let's get started.
But opening up a Jupiter notebook.
OK here I am.
What is essentially the repo for the course underneath the python basics the very first note book is
called space basics.
That's the notebook we're going to be going over in this lecture.
I highly encourage you to also check out that notebook on your own.
There's lots of useful information including installation and set up information that we cover in the
space the set up lecture.
But there's also a table so if you start scrolling down you'll eventually find tables that talk a little
bit more about tokens and tokenization.
So definitely take a look at this as we go along here.
I'm going to open up a new notebook just create a new untitled notebook here and we're going to do is
essentially go along that lecture.
So let's get started.
The first thing we need to do is actually import Spacey.
So we'll say import Spacey and then we're going to load the language library.
We will say an LP is equal to Spacey load and then we're going to pasan a specific string an underscore
core which stands for core English language and then Web S-M which is essentially the small version
of this language library.
And then we're going to hit enter here.
And don't worry if this takes a long time to load the very first time you run it it usually takes a
while.
It's a fairly large library but it's also part of what makes space so efficient is that a lot of what
it's running on top of it's preloaded into this library.
The next step we're going to do is create a doc object or a document object.
So we'll create a variable called the OSI and we're going to pasan a unicode string.
That means we prefer that string with a U and we're just going to pass in a string that says Tesla is
looking at buying
U.S. startup for dollar sign 6 million.
OK so what's actually going to happen here is using the language library that we just loaded that spacey
developed.
It's going to essentially parse this entire stream into separate components for us and it's going to
parse it into what are known as tokens essentially.
Each of these little words is going to become a token.
So what it can do is say for token in doc so I can actually iterate through this document object.
And then I can print out the token and there's various attributes I can actually grab from each token.
So for example I can grab the token text and the token text is actually the raw text that it grabs notice
that it's smart enough to actually treat you as Dot these capital U and S as a single token Spacey threw
a lot of development is actually smart enough to realize that when we say something like capital you
dot capital S dot we're talking about the country.
It's also smart enough to realize that this dollar sign and the six should probably be separated the
dollar sign stands for US dollars and the stands for an amount and then million stands for another amount.
And later on we'll see that with named entity recognition.
Spacey can actually tell things like Tesla as being part of a company.
So we're going to hear it's a print token that XTi and then we're also going to print out some more
stuff.
Let's go ahead and print out token POS which stands for part of speech.
So when we run that we now see this ninety five ninety nine ninety nine.
And later on we're going to see that each of these numbers actually corresponds to the parts of speech
like an adverb a verb a noun conjugation etc. if you actually want the Ronayne used in is say POS underscore
Bruhn that and it will tell you what part of speech it is.
So is it smart enough to know that Tesla is a proper noun is a verb looking a verb proper noun for us
start up as a noun and so on.
Still smart enough to realize that million here is a number and so is six.
And then the star sign is a symbol.
So already right off the bat Spacey knows a lot of information about each of these tokens.
And then you can also do things like print tokens dot and if you do deeply underscore it's going to
give you even more information.
Anti-peace stands for syntactic dependency and we'll talk about that in more detail when we talk about
specific tokens.
But hopefully now you can see that it's really incredible the capabilities of spacey along of natural
language processing to grab a lot of information just from a simple string.
It recognize that Tesla is a proper noun not just a word at the start of a sentence.
So Tesla here is capitalized not just because it's the start of a sentence but also because it's a proper
noun.
And it was able to tell that it's also understood that us these dots don't separate it.
It's a single entity.
It's a single token.
And as we dive deeper into Spacey we're going to see where each of these abbreviations mean and how
did arrives.
We'll also see how Spacey can interpret the last three tokens combine to six million dollar sign that
six million it's going to be able to understand that all of this is some sort of quantifier of money.
But let's go ahead and move on and discuss the pipeline object.
So after I'm putting the space module in the cell above we loaded a model and named an LP.
So this actual line of code is known as loading a model and we called it an LP.
Next we created a dock or a document object by applying this model in LP to our text.
Spacey also builds a companion vocab object for vocabulary and we'll cover that in later lectures.
This doc object that we created holds the process text and that's really the focus of this lecture.
So off of this and help the object Well we can do is call DOT pipeline.
So when we run an LP R-Texas entering a processing pipeline the first breaks down the text and then
performs that series of operations of tagging parsing and describing that data so we can see here the
basic a.p pipeline is a tagger a parser and then any R which stands for named entity recognizer and
we'll talk about each of these in a lot more detail later on.
And you can also just get the basic names by saying a.p LP pipe underscore names and you can play around
with the various attributes here which we're going to talk about as we continue on throughout the course.
The first one I want to discuss just quickly is tokenization.
So the very first step in processing any text is to split it up all the component parts.
That is the words and punctuation into tokens and these tokens are annotated inside the doc object to
contain descriptive information.
So let's go ahead and see an example.
I'm going to create an other document talk to an We're going to Pessin a unicode string means it starts
a few and we'll say Tesla isn't looking into startups anymore.
We run that.
And then let's go ahead and print out the tokens for token doc to and we're going to print out same
information we printed out last time which was the text to speech and then the syntactic dependency.
So if you're on that you can see again Tesla it's a proper noun noun subject and then it's actually
able to understand that is and an apostrophe t is actually a conjunction and it's going to be able to
keep them separate as well as know the relationship between these two parts of these tokens.
So it's really advance what space is doing here.
So again notice that isn't it really.
Actually it's been split to two tokens and spatially recognizes both the root verb is and the negation
attached to it.
So it understands is the root verb and that this is a negation this an apostrophe T.
Notice also that both the extended whitespace and the period at the end of the sentence are assigned
their own tokens.
So if I were to put in a lot of extended whitespace here and run this again this space would actually
become a token with Speccy.
And then the stop is a punctuation.
Now I want to point out that here we're iterating for every token inside of this document object.
But we can also use indexing taxi grab tokens individually.
So if I take my document object I can use indexing to grab the very first token off of this and by default
it returns that token text.
But just as before or offer that token object I can ask for attributes like part of speech and it returns
back prop and which stands for proper noun.
And if you Cheka are spacey BASIX notebook and scroll to the section we're at right now which is learning
about parts of speech tacking dependencies.
Additional token attributes and so on we have a couple of useful links here for understanding the different
notations.
So here we saw that there's a part of speech like Propp and for proper noun verb space noun and so on.
You can check out the link in the note book that we provide here for annotations specific.
And there's also a variety of languages here English German et cetera.
You can just expand English I can tell you the part of speech the morphology and description so you
can take a look at all of this to see what all of this stands for.
So if you see pro and that stands for a pronoun personal and then so on.
You can keep going on in more detail and it does this for a wide variety of languages.
So there's Parsa speech tagging that's available to us and we'll cover parts of speech in a lot more
detail later on on its own.
There's also syntactic dependencies for each token and that as I mention is just going to be the call.
For example if we grab the first item here we can say the IP underscore this is the syntactic dependency.
Again there's a link inside the Speccy notebooks you can go here dependencies get a full list of syntactic
dependencies.
So right now those are only available for English and German so you can expand English and see the label
as well as description.
We've also provided in Sodor Spacey notebook a good explanation of what these dependencies actually
stand for.
Again this has more to do if a really good understanding of the way the English language works which
can be really complicated.
But this isn't really an English course so we're not good dive too much into the details but this link
here that we provide for you is the full paper explaining the various dependencies and what they stand
for things like a causal subject a dependent a causal passive subject and so on this sort of level of
detail is sometimes really important if you're trying to build a chat bot that can understand things
like present versus past tense and so on.
Keep mindspace basically doing this all this work for us under the hood.
So we'll come back to our untitled notebook and the last thing I want to mention is that there's lots
of other additional token attributes.
So far we've seen parts of speech dependencies and a couple of more.
If you come back to the Speccy basics notebook and scroll down here we have an entire list of the different
tags and description.
So for example if we call it that text that's is the original word text which in this case would be
Tesla.
If you want the lemma that's going to give you the limitation or the base form of the word and later
on we're going to talk about limitation and a lot more detail.
Lotusphere that essentially the result is just lower case thingness.
There's the part of speech a simple speech tag if you tag underscore that actually gives you a detailed
part of speech tag.
So beyond just proper noun they'll tell you proper singular so understands that Tesla is actually a
singular object then you can ask for the shape.
So things like capitalization punctuation digits.
So the way it shows that is it shows that capital X..
So in the content the first letter is capitalized and then lowercase X for everything else being lowercase
and you can also ask is Alpha or is stop.
So is Alpha answer the question is the token alpha character so is alphanumeric.
It's actually just an alphabetical character excuse me and that is stop asks Who is the token part of
the stop list.
So one of the most common words of whatever language you're working with.
So Tesla is definitely not one of the most common words in English language.
So it's false.
So you have all these variety of tags you can call off of any of these tokens.
And Spacey did this all automatically for us the very minute that he passed it into this an LP.
And again it's doing this all based off the fact that we loaded in this library which is why it took
some time but that's what makes Spacey so efficient.
It loads up the library first for us now large stock objects can be hard to work if sometimes a span
is a slice of a dark object in the form Some start versus a stop.
So I'm going to copy and paste because it's quite a large string.
If we scroll down here to span's and I'm going to copy paste this cell that way we don't need to write
it all again.
And essentially we're just passing in a really long string.
So although comly actually to John Lennon from his song beautiful boy and so on so I have this really
large documents and what I may want to do is actually just grab a span of it so I can say life quote
so notice here there's a quote here.
Life is what happens to us while we are busy making other plans and we're going to say is life quote
is equal to Doc 3 and starting at index 16 up to but not including index 30 and then I can print out
the life quote and it gives me this quote Life is what happens.
That's why we are making other plans so this is now a span of that overall document because it's documents
quite large.
And maybe we're only interested in this particular quote inside of that document.
So what's really interesting is that even though we're only grabbing a section of this document Spacey
is smart enough to know that this life is a spam.
So if you check out the type of this life quote space is doing a lot of work under the hood to understand
that this is a particular span unlike the entire document which we checked type of doc three understands
it.
That's the entire document.
So when you take a slice out of this space it's going to be smart enough to understand that it's the
span of a larger document and then certain tokens inside a document or Doc object may also receive a
start a sentence tag.
While this doesn't immediately build the list of sentences these tags enable the generation of sentence
segments through doc thought.
E.A. Yes and later we're going to write our own segmentation rules.
But let me just show you a simple example.
Well say talk for is equal to an LP create a unicode string and say this is the first sentence.
Period space.
This is an other sentence.
This is the last sentence.
So here we have three sentences inside her documents.
And again Spacey doing a lot of work for us.
It actually understands and is going to separate each of these sentences throughout the documents so
I can say for sentence in doc for and if I just sit duck for those to go through every token but I can
call the SE A.S. or sense attribute in order to print out each particular sentence so spacey automatically
understands that this period and the space is a sentence and then I can say something like Doc for at
index position 6.
So that's this right here.
That's this word right here.
This room or these are tokens.
So we have various tokens here I can call.
Thought is underscore sent underscore.
Start asking Is this the start of a sentence.
If you're in that will return true.
If I check it out for another token it's good to check it out for tokens 7.
That's is this is right here.
Make it more obvious by token 8 the word another.
I'm going to ask K is this word another the start of a sentence.
And if you run this it's not going to return anything it's going to return none because it is not the
start of a sentence unlike when he passed and six it returns back true.
So it's really incredible the capabilities a Speccy to take in a raw string and completely understand
things like parts of speech.
Name recognition token attributes where the sentence starts and ends and a lot more.
So we just touch the tip of the iceberg.
But I really hope this gets you excited about the potential capabilities of spacey.
Coming up next we're going to dive in and a lot more detail to each of these particular components.
I'll see you at the next lecture.